# Yendorian Tales - reverse engineering
Yendorian Tales reverse engineering

Done using HxD editor and DosBox with debugger feature enabled to track all assembly calls - reverse engineering old games is really easy these days!

## Graphics
Both games store image date in a dedicated, uncompressed `PICTURES.VGA` file which is a concatenated stream of bytes - each one representing a single pixel referencing a color index in proper DOS palette. There's no size nor color information stored in this file, all data is fetched directly from the game's .EXE file. Graphics are grouped by size ranging from the largest (fullscreen images) to smallest (8x8 pixel icons used throughout the game). Pallete data was extracted using DosBox's screen capture feature and saved as `.pal` files. `PICTURES.VGA` is kept open during runtime and required images are fetched as memory offsets by the game when necessary. Most animation effects (enhanced weapons, texture shimmering) is done using good old palette cycling and different enemy variantions are also achieved by using different colors - extraction program only uses the primary palette for simplicity.
Game runs in mode 13h at all times, one exception being the Pacific splash screen which is 640x480 and stored in the .EXE as a PCX file. For some reason both games fetch this data and save it on the disk, only to remove it after exiting the game.
 
## Sounds
Yendorian Tales uses Creative Voice File (.VOC) for digitized audio. Sound files are stored uncompressed in the game's `WORLD.DAT` file. Size information and file offsets are stored in the .EXE file - for Yendorian Tales 2, sound data starts at offset `0x2EBF1` and `0x2D057` for Yendorian Tales 3. In both cases, audio data is followed by file sizes, so all information is there for data extraction. These files are supported by most modern sound players - VLC being my tool of choice for verification.

## Music
Yedndorian Tales uses Creative Music File (.CMF) which is similar to standard MIDI. Unlike the latter format, instrument banks are stored directly in the file, this way the music sounds exactly the same on every system. Just like digitized sounds, all CMF files are stored uncompressed in `WORLD.DAT` with size and offset information being stored in the game's .EXE file. For Yendorian Tales 2, music data starts at offset `0x2EB73` and `0x2CFC7` for Yendorian Tales 3. Music data is followed by file sizes, following the same rule as with .VOC files. Unlike the latter though, these files are hardly supported by modern audio players, so your best bet is to record it in DosBox to .WAV files and save it in a widely supported compressed format.